[radio static]
[news jingle]
In Ostrobothnia, a village has built a border wall
and declared independence from the rest of Finland.
The conservative enclave has united
under the slogan "like it used to be"-
-and claim that they will now
create the perfect society.
Russia, North Korea, and Maxmo neighborhood association
have recognized their sovereignty.
Our reporter was there today
when the gates were closed.
I walk through the Ostrobothnian wasteland
covered by shadows of uncertainty.
On the ground, burnt phones and computers,
charred remains of our digital era.
The wall stretches to the sky,
a homemade monument.
Behind the wall lies the world's newest state.
The border is closed,
and no one gets in our out.
Questions abound.
Will human rights be respected?
What laws will apply?
Will they manage to be self-sufficient?
As long as the refuse to communicate
with the world, we can only speculate-
-what the humanitarian situation is like.
Anna-Lena Laurén, Gambämark.
Fifteen years later...
[Cockadoodledoo]
[fiddle]
[laughter and joyful greetings]
Hitton litton, wanna go to talko
Hitton litton, ??? nails
Hitton litton, dig a ditch
Hitton litton, did you mention talko
Hitton litton, firewood
Hitton litton, wanna go and pick some
??? in ???pass
Talko, talko,
together we are strong
there's a talko in Gambämark
We're all happy here, working together,
we plow, sow, and harrow
Life is easy here, everything is smooth,
and we shot and killed all shags
Yes, yes, one more time!
Woo-hoo!
Hitton litton, come in and eat
Hitton litton, dinner time
Hitton litton, take off your hat
Hitton litton, thank you god
Hitton litton, are you eating right?
Hitton litton, satisfied?
Hitton litton, want a little coffee
Hitton litton, and dessert
Meat and potatoes, that's like our drugs
Meat and potatoes, all we eat in Gambämark
Well well, that hit the spot
We're very full my friend
We don't have a lot,
so for breakfast
it'll be meat and potatoes again
Yes! My favorite!
With lingonberries!
Woo-hoo!
The birches ???, yes yes!
Boys and girls now form a ring
and away we go in dance
??? ??? whirls around
and everybody gets a chance
They were ???
and bathed in the sauna
show you're neat and strong
Joy and kindness
it's Friday night
There's a dance in Gambämark
Gambämark,
we're around a hundred people
with no wolves or Finns
It was better before,
so we closed our door-
-with a friendly little kick
So now we live in utopia
here in Gambämark
So new we live in utopia!
Here in Gambämark
Hitton litton, wanna go to talko
Hitton litton, Gambämark!
[applause]
Woo-hoo!
My boy!
[fanfares]
Hear ye, hear ye!
You are honored to be
in proximity to Kurt-
-eldest son of the Leatherworker homestead-
-slayer of shags-
-protector of the berries-
-the elected liberator-
-the earthly deputy of Urho Kekkonen-
-and Gambämark's rightful leader.
Ladies and gentlemen,
here he is - Kurt Byman!
[fiddle]
Good day, villagers!
Well, how did you all do today?
Who's ready for the daily report?
Maybe... Klas and Kenneth? Go ahead.
Everything was normal
when we were on patrol
-I checked the wall
-And I stumbled and fell
-Not a single scratch on our beautiful wall
-I found chanterelles, what luck
-The moose population is just right
-Our cow Gunilla was at Rööladon today
-We checked the saltstone for quality
-I wouldn't say that's my favorite
Thank you very much
A job well done
It's because of you
that everything works
When you patrol
and guard our forests
for Gambämark.
Thank you, boys.
What about the sewing circle and Berit?
Did you stitch or cook something?
I made meat and potatoes,
and hope everyone is full-
knitted 80 gloves,
and a very dapper coat
seminated the cows,
but there was a thunderstorm
so now we'll have kalvdans until easter
The circle is doing cross stitching,
just wait until you see
Margita is da Vinci
when it comes to embroidery
We patched up your socks
that you brought in yesterday
so now your toes will be warm
Here you are!
Thank you very much
A job well done
It's because of you
that everything works
When you knit, bake, set the tables,
weave, and make quark
for Gambämark
Dance for me!
As for me, I added to our regulations
because there have been some incidents
Berry-picking rakes are now banned
Book of the Homestead 13:3
Also blacklisted, gravy that's not brown
Thermoses manufactured after '67
Possession is illegal from today
Book of the Homestead 13:4
Thank you very much
A job well done
It's because of you
that everything works
And everyone's getting vaccinated
that's clearly written here
'Cause even we are not that backward
Thank you to us
A job well done
It's because of us
that everything works
Everything is peaceful here
and I'm the patriarch
for the free democratic sovereign
municipal village republic Gambämark
[applause]
Josua, are you looking forward
to spending all day with your dad?
Yes.
Look, it's full of berries.
But we won't eat them yet.
Two weeks.
Then it's picking day.
So what do I write?
Write that by Slompkärr,
it's approximately...
...50 buckets of blueberries, and...
...70 buckets of lingonberries.
-You could tell by the smell?
-Yes, my son.
I've been the leader for 15 years.
You learn a thing or two in that time.
One day, you will take over,
leading the village in rain and shine-
-in talko and in topping out celebrations.
Then you'll be the one
standing here sniffing the berries.
Wow.
Come see!
You can tell,
they picked with berry rakes last year.
Clawing and pulling
and ruining everything!
I did the right thing,
banning those berry rakes.
As elected official, you have to be ready
to make tough decisions.
And it is worth it.
We have a fantastic berry year coming.
We may be able to raise
the allowance by a cup or two.
-I'll note it down.
-No -- can't promise yet.
I might as well
walk you through it one more time.
Once a year,
we have "picking day"-
-where the whole village picks together.
And then we collect everything in..?
-The main freezer box!
-The main freezer box.
And then it's my job to calculate
and ponder how much everyone should get.
-And then what do we do?
-Distribute to those who helped at talko.
-Yes, but not as salary..?
-But because it's so tasty.
Ten points.
Yummy, yummy.
-Butterscotch?
-Thanks.
But why do we do this?
Couldn't everyone just
pick what they need?
That would be something!
Like on the outside -- complete chaos!
You can't imagine
how horrible it was.
Full of skinny pants, wifi,
and municipality mergers.
No, we're better off here,
because here it is like it used to be.
When we say it was better in the past,
which past do we mean?
Sooner or later, this will be the past,
so which past are we saying was so good?
Don't get hung up on details.
It's more of a feeling.
The important thing is that
everything is kept like it always has been.
-But then nothing will ever change.
-Exactly. I'm very proud that you get it.
Well! Take a lap around the woods.
Repeat what I said, try sniffing a bit-
-and I'll see you at home.
And I'd better take that, or you'll be sick.
Alright!
Goodbye.
[piano]
Gray barns, yellow fields
are the only things I've ever known
Red farms with white corners
are the only things I've ever seen
And I know
it doesn't sound so terrible
that I have everything I need
But even though
I know all that
I don't have anything
to compare
This is my home
This is my village
I wouldn't trade it for another
I know all the barns
and behind a hill
there's nothing but shrubbery
I have dreamt
about a place
where you can be yourself
and don't have to wear flannel
A paradise
where you can choose
between more than knitting socks
or cut up a moose
Yes, inside me
a hope has been awoken
of a life with more
than just potatoes and stew
This is my home
This is my village
If we were to trade it for another
I would be free of the barns
and behind a hill
I would see a new view
with open landscapes
and infinite oceans
without talko
and without demands
where everything is not about blueberries
a place where I'd fit in
Josua! Everything the light touches
is our municipal kingdom-
-and one day, it will all be yours.
-But what about the other side of the wall?
-You must never go there!
It's a pretentious place
full of pretentious people.
I don't know what I want
What should I do?
There's no easy answer here
I try to do things right
but it goes wrong anyway
Oh, what am I to do?
This is my home
This is my village
I wouldn't trade it for another
but I've seen all the barns
and behind a hill
there's more than just shrubbery
Something pulls me away
and something wants me to stay
I could run away
Dad would have to pick his own berries
[applause]
I tell you,
that's something for the top 40!
-Are you talking to me?
-Yes, who else?
I'm not one of those weirdos
who talk to themselves.
Right, Rafael?
-No, ??? ???
Hey boy,
would you like a cookie?
No thank you, I'm good.
It's from the outside.
-Where did you get it?
-It was a gift. From god!
No, I'm just kidding.
I won it in a lottery.
-What lottery?
-The lottery of life.
This is a snack cookie
from Elovena with raisin flavor.
I once bought a packet,
and when I opened it, a dead mouse!
So I took the mouse
and put it in a complaint letter-
-and got a reply the next week.
"??? here's your cookie!"
I got 150 pounds of dry snacks.
Would you like one?
-Thank you.
-Well, well. Prrrrr!
But you won't tell anyone?
No way, I'm no rat.
-What?
-Snitches get stitches, eh!
-You see Rafael, he's been reading Easy Cash.
-Easy what?
Cash.
A thing on the outside, instead of blueberries.
-Have you been on the outside?
-Oh yes.
Before they put this rotten wall up,
there wasn't any inside or outside.
I've lived here since I was born.
Suddenly, these morons come
and put up the wall around me.
I didn't notice it until the next year
when I was going to put on summer tires.
-How's it taste?
-Very good.
It's amazing how they've kept,
despite expiring 15 years ago.
Can't handle it?
He's a bit of a weakling.
-Is that a two-stroke?
-Indeed. 50 cc, three gears, and with a...
-Dellorto carburetor.
...Dellort carburetor.
There you go!
You're not as dumb as you look.
It's leaking oil,
so we need to go home change the gaskets.
-Would you like to come?
-Can I?
Of course.
-Josua, Kurt's boy.
-Mäskis-Gunnar, village eccentric.
Hop on.
This reminds me of when I met Rafael.
It was a stormy autumn night.
He had no pine cones while my pocket was full-
-so we hit it right off.
[mild rock music]
Fifteen years in paradise
with moose season all year round
leaves people happy and full
but the moose population thin
It's a lot of work
to keep them healthy and strong
'cause we shoot so insistently
and won't let new ones in
Last year we got trigger happy
and as a result
we have a couple of moose bulls
and only one cow left
But she is a star
in the moose sky up above
who in the last 15 years
always gave us double calves
Gunilla, Gunilla
We sing your holy name
Mother of all moose
You're so much more than a moose cow
Without you we'd all perish
and be forced to eat potatoes
without our minced meat sauce
Yes, Kenneth!
We have the honor
of taking care of you
We fill your feeding trough
because you eat so much
The salt lick needs changing
because you are so greedy
But don't lick it too much
mind your cow-lesterol
On Monday, you will be brushed
and get a new haircut
On Tuesday, brisket massage
and front hoof pedicure
You really deserve it
after what happened last year
when we shot your calves,
ate your sister, skinned your brother
Gunilla, Gunilla
We sing your holy name
Mother of all moose
You're so much more than a moose cow
Without you we'd all perish
and be forced to eat potatoes
without our minced meat sauce
-Well Gunilla, time for today's treatment?
-You've been waiting, yes.
-Leg up, that's good.
-Say aaah.
-Let's brush all the little teeth.
-Spick and span, only the best.
-Oh, right in the neck! Hah!
-You rascal you!
You are our holy moose cow
and you can sleep well this fall
'cause if anyone tries to shoot you
then we will shoot them first
Gunilla, Gunilla
We sing your holy name
Mother of all moose
You're so much more than a moose cow
Without you we'd all perish
and be forced to eat potatoes
without-
-minced meat sauce
-Minced meat sauce
[applause]
Drop that!
No, that! It's from the outside.
Kenneth to Kurt, over.
Kenneth to Kurt, it's a code red.
Come one, Kenneth to Kurt, over!
He's not responding!
This is what we'll do.
You go tell Kurt-
-and I'll get Gunilla to safety.
Take care, Klas,
and don't touch that.
Gunilla!
Knock, knock!
Who's there?
It's Berit.
Berit who?
Bare it without asking!
-Well well, you nailed it!
-That's what she said!
Are you here for the circle,
or did you just miss me?
Well, you're so busy
with all the ruling and deciding.
But here you go.
-A jelly pastry! Fresh?
-Just cool enough that you won't get burned.
We sew and embroider
and bake a lot in the circle-
-and we've done that happily
the latest fifteen years-
-and we've mostly been using recipes and patterns
from three homemaker magazines from the 50's-
-that we didn't burn
on the easter fire 2022.
And of course we are very grateful
that we got to keep them, Kurt.
But it would be nice with something new!
That is, another embroidery pattern
or maybe try some new recipes?
Oh, Berit, Berit, my dear.
I know it may be
hard for you to understand-
-but that is out of the question.
But we could rip out any inappropriate pages.
And then there are the jokes on the back,
that you could read in the village meetings.
You're so good at telling jokes.
[exaggerated laugh]
No!
I've said it before,
and I'll say it again.
We don't need any help from outside.
I already know all the jokes I need.
They just come to me.
-But couldn't we...
-No!
Thou shalt not covet
your neighbor's magazine.
Book of the Homestead 7:14.
If you say so,
then that's how it is.
But couldn't we just bring in one?
I mean, it's me.
I was here when we started Gambämark.
Without you and I,
we wouldn't be sitting here today.
Remember when we recruited people
in town squares around Ostrobothnia?
Those were the days.
You made the speeches,
and I made the coffee.
Sometimes, there were more people
in the coffee line than by the speech.
That doesn't ring  a bell.
Couldn't you make an exception
for a tiny tiny little magazine?
Maybe we could
come to some kind of...
-Code red!
-What?
-Code red, the owl crowed!
-Huh?
Code red, the owl cried!
Klas, show the way.
Berit, we'll have to pick this up later.
Aren't you bringing this?
Hey, wait!
Well, this is me!
Wow, what a cool juicer.
This is only for emergencies
and birthdays.
Is today your birthday?
Nope, but it's surely someone's!
What a gold mine!
Say hi to my friends:
Jörgen, Ruben, Gunda, and Hulda.
-Hello.
-And here, you see Holy Birgitta.
Gunnar, you're not at all what I expected.
It's like I always say, boy:
don't judge the book by the cover-
-because even a slow hare
changes its coat by winter.
Okay.
Want to see what I found today?
Mint pre-owned,
found 60 of them on Kaatopaikk.
-It was banned today, so we can't...
-Yes, calm down.
-If he sees us with that, we're..!
-Yes yes, calm down man!
Thou shalt pick the holy berries in the
old way, by hand. Book of the Homestead 13:3.
Listen, boy.
What they don't know won't hurt them.
Book of Gunnar 1:1.
And I can't let this go to waste
just because Kurt freaked out again.
You shouldn't care so much
what other people say, boy.
But hey, I have a important question.
Do you like boogie woogie?
[boogie woogie]
See Josua,
I think we may be more alike than you think.
Woo!
So listen up...
...boy!
When I was young, everyone said
"Gunnar is a strange one"
But years passed, and I grew up
and I'm still strange
They said I would get a girl and kids
walk around in fancy clothes
but I traded a luxurious life
for an ugly hat and moped
The life I live is mine alone
To each their own
I don't know no one, but everyone knows me
You know who I am!
I am Mäskis-Gunnar
??? with ??? ???
Completely unshowered, smell funky
I live my life
and I've never ever regretted that choice
He's a village eccentric
Been called a lot
but never been called normal
He's a village eccentric
Crafted my hat
from a dead raccoon
He is a odd old man
and these pants
are the only pair I have
What a man!
I am Mäskis-Gunnar
Taxidermies every roadkill
Is a bit confused and smells bad
Gunnar!
I think I understand what you're saying!
You should just be yourself.
-Shut up, let's dance!
Woo!
Yeah!
Boogie woogie, yeah!
Mäskis-Gunnar
Dances on the table
Boogie woogie in my blood
Mäskis-Gunnar
A little like Buddha
for everyone different
I am Mäskis-Gunnar
Happiness is total
so won't you be a village eccentric
Han är Mäskis-Gunnar
And I declare
Boogie woogie, yeah!
[applause]
[music continues]
[light rain and bird sounds]
What we know so far
is that we've found contraband in the woods.
We suspect it's a cookie.
A factory cookie.
How is this possible?
I have banned factory cookies from outside.
If Berit's oatmeal cookies aren't enough,
then you must be an infidel.
On top of the smuggling
and illegal possession of snacks-
-we also have to consider that Gunilla,
our holy moose cow, could have choked.
Then we wouldn't have any moose cow left,
and the moose population would die out.
We can't risk anything happening to Gunilla.
Not a single hair will fall from her head.
People must have their meat and potatoes.
Book of the Homestead 3:3.
What will the punishment be?
Cleaning 500 litres of lingonberries?
No, a few barrels of berries and pine needles
would be far from enough.
It will be excommunication.
Klas. How goes the crime scene investigation?
Any leads on the cookie chewer?
-Well, I accidentally ate it.
-You're too much, spit it...
-Oil!
-I was just thinking that.
-No, it's made with butter...
-Shush! Throw it away.
There's been a two-stroke here,
leaking like a sieve.
Who do we know
that drives a two-stroke?
Long beard.
Smells bad.
Well, I have no idea.
Come on.
Dear diary.
Today's the first day of my new life
Something big happened today
I was not sure at first, but I went
Now I'd never have it undone
I met a man who showed me the way
No, not like that!
It was a squirrel.
I found a puzzle piece that filled a hole
next to a taxidermied vole
Yes, finally
I found a person who understands
He's a little special
but he's kind
I have something I didn't have yesterday
I have a friend
One who's never going to leave me
I can say it once again
I have a friend
I will never be alone again
Next Monday, we're cooking together
He told me to bring the yeast
15 pounds does sound like a lot
I wonder what kind of pastry it'll be
And he's going to teach me MIG welding
Wow - we'll see how it goes
We're going to build a berry picking machine
I have the blueprints ready
And it feels so good to be
with someone just like me
A little special
but still kind
I wish it was Monday today
I have a friend
One who's never going to leave me
I can say it once again
I have a friend
I will never be alone again
And I can hear him call my name
Josua!
with his arms stretched out
Aaaaah!
and he would never hold back
Come here!
if I needed help
Help!
I have a friend
One who's never going to leave me
I can say it once again
I have a friend
I will never be alone again!
[applause]
[march with organ and bells]
Umph! Weak throw!
By the power vested in me as elected official
I sentence you to excommunication.
???
Gunnar Mäsk!
You are sentenced for countless sins
and dirty deeds of your own will-
-rejecting our holy Book of the Homestead.
By smuggling illegal goods
from the cursed outside-
-you have risked the village's prosperity
and the holy moose cow Gunilla's life.
Also, you're pretentious
and smell bad.
Yes, begone ???
Well? Any last words, Mäskis-Gunnar?
Yes. Nice wig!
Or maybe I should say-
Baaa!
Get him out!
Out of the village you are thrown
Those who neglect the Book
are erased
Our village says shame,
you are thrown out, that's it.
Can't you take a joke, Kurt?
-No, give me Rafael!
-You are rejected from here for all time
-Rafael!
-Suffering will be the penalty for your sins
-No, Rafael!
-Bless Kurt, we don't want outsiders here
You're not the least bit kind!
[bird song]
Finally one can breathe again.
-Hi dad! A question.
-Yes?
Do we have any yeast?
No, I think we're out.
Have you seen my radio phone?
I've told you it's not a toy.
No, I haven't seen it.
I'll have to take the spare for now.
You should have been at the excommunication,
so you learn how it's done.
It was like "out of the village, bless Kurt!"
-Who was it this time?
-The weirdo who lived up at Kaatopaikk.
Mäskis-Gunnar.
-What did you say?
-Mäskis-Gunnar.
He had smuggled cookies. Factory cookies!
Threw it in the forest, plastic and all.
Who knows what he would've brought in next?
It's like I always say:
it starts with Elovena, but ends with ecstacy.
But he was my friend!
What? You knew that kook?
Good thing he was thrown out, then.
You can't associate
with such wandering wastebins!
This fall,
you're joining the moose hunt-
-so you'll learn to be a man.
People like Mäskis-Gunnar make you weak, Josua.
Weak-Josua, that's what they'll call you here.
Is that what you want?
-No, I don't, but I don't think...
-Weak-Josua!
You don't think?
Stop crying, then.
Shape up, crybaby.
Oh my god, what have I done?
Gunnar was nothing but kind
Sure, he did some things
but how could that be so wrong?
The old man took a blow for me
What have I done to deserve this?
Why should a boy feel this bad?
Here I am in need,
No support, too much ???
There must be others who feel the same way
Help me!
I can help you, Josua.
You see, life isn't always easy.
We all go through tough times,
but we just have to manage.
And there is a trick or two.
Now listen real close,
and I'll tell you how it was for me.
Here it is.
I lived home with my mom
and went out for a date
It was a musical
and I was young and he was hot
He had asked me out
I thought he was so nice
A magical summer eve
We went out to the ocean
and we danced together
I remember the embers of love
When I came home late
and went to tell my mom
the old lady had died!
When everything is awful
and you can't see the end
You should just suck it up
and put on a smile
No, you shouldn't cry
although everything is crap
Keep it inside and make peace with
that living is just hard
Thank you very much,
but this isn't at all what I need today...
Well, Josua.
Life can feel like a long punch in the gut.
I'd been saving money,
working hard doing piece work
Grandpa was dying,
he was sick and needed care
We didn't have any money,
so we were desperate
A man showed up
who really knew how to talk
He said hey, invest now
'cause the market is so good
and it well never fall
I shouldn't have listened
to what that horsetrader said
I lost my grandpa in OneCoin
When everything is awful
and you can't see the end
You should just suck it up
and put on a smile
No, you shouldn't cry
although everything is crap
Keep it inside and make peace with
that living is just hard
I remember february
when I was depressed
The kids had a stomach bug
and my husband was on leave
I didn't want to get up
and could barely take a step
My life was at rock bottom then
but there was a cure
-Can you guess what, Josua?
-To suck it up and put on a...
When everything is awful
and you can't see the end
You should just suck it up
and put on a smile
No, you shouldn't cry
although everything is crap
Keep it inside and make peace with
that living is just hard
So when sorrows beg for attention
don't let them drain your energy
When your demons wake in the morning
you should drown them in work
Do something that makes you forget
Chop or bake or weave
Yes, you just have to make peace with
Living is just hard
[applause]
Are you alive?
Barely.
Heavens, why are you lying there?
Because I'm sad.
Oh, but you can't just lie here.
Come with me to the circle.
-But...
-But, but - no buts.
We're weaving
something really nice.
I think you'd like to see it.
Come with me, Josua.
[rock music with organ]
Well, here we are!
[cough, cough]
Darn it,
how could we burn the buns like that!
Oh, Berit, you're bringing guests?
Yes, see who I found!
Come closer to the heater, Josua.
-Have you met the other sewing ladies?
-No.
This is Gita,
and this is Margita.
-Josue is a bit sad.
-Oh no, what did you say?
-Oh, little buddy!
-Come here, we'll get you better!
-Come, come, there you go.
-You look cold, want some socks?
-No thanks, I'm good.
-I'll put some one, your feed may be cold.
-We'll put on a warm blanket.
-The best blanket, have a hot drink.
-Yes, that's fine, thanks.
-Now, what's weighing on you, dear?
-You know how Mäskis-Gunnar was excommunicated?
-Mmm.
-And it was my fault.
-Oh no.
-Poor little you, what a thing.
-Oh oh oh, how sad!
But how could that be your fault?
He gave me a cookie in the forest,
I threw it away and they found it-
-and blamed him
and now he's on the outside because of me.
-Oh no, oh no...
-Oh dear, what misfortune.
But how were you to know
what was going to happen?
Exactly, people are excommunicated
for anything nowadays.
Yes, that's for sure.
My sister was here on Monday-
--the one who lived at--
-thimble on the wrong finger-
--and I said--
-what's the harm-
Here we're forced to work at talko
and to dance folk dance
-and the pants are itching
and I hate it!
And why is it like that?
Because dad is an asshole.
No, I didn't mean that.
Girls, I think he's ready.
You're not going to report me, right?
Josue, you've come to the right place.
As long as there's no more folk music.
[folk music]
They think that we know only seams
without our own wishes or dreams
they leave us be
with our embroidery
but soon they all will see
There is a dough that is rising
Without any of them realizing
Our aprons deflect
anything suspect
hiding a budding army
Now we are primed
You came here just in time
Junta!
The junta is here
No more knitting needles
now we are a force to fear
Junta!
We'll make them change the course
the junta shows its force
We are here lurking already
with rolling pins at the ready
They think we're sweet ladies
with coffee and pastries
but soon their heads will be rolling
A needle in the right hands
can bring down both villages and countries
We're tired of empty words
and we won't back down
In formation, attack!
We're going to fight
Join us in our struggle
Junta!
The junta, we shout
No more knitting, ladies
let's bring the big guns out
Junta!
We'll make them change the course
the junta shows its force
Berit, our Berit
Berit is our general
Berit, she will bear it all
Once when I was out for a walk
I saw Berit stand
choking out full grown moose
with nothing but her hands
Others chop their firewood
'til they want to die
Berit just stares at a piece
and it splits all by itself!
Junta - they we're sweet ladies
Junta - with coffee and pastries
The junta is over baking and curtsying
Junta - we're taking over
Junta - taking the power
We're going to war
Junta!
Yes, the junta believes
At the ready,
hope you want revolution
Junta!
We want you
If you want to join, then say - okay!
We're gonna make them see
It's time for mutiny
Put the pedal to the metal
Here comes our army
All we want
when we've won
Kurt. Be. Gone!
But first, coffee.
[applause]
[owls and animals of the night]
[synth music]
I have found my calling
The meaning of life
When the berries ripen
I go out into the forest
Yes yes yes darn it
Then I don my boots
Working and toiling
to get a couple of litres
Sure I am ???
snarling and filling the freezer
with blue berries and lingon
I think you get the hint
I'm going to fill my bucket
like a machine with the rakes
Berry king
I pick the berries, baby
One, two, three
Empty the buckets on the kitchen table
I'm a bad boy
Berry mad boy
And if it comes to it
I could clean 100 litres in a night
I put the berries in the tub
I seal the tub with the lid
and on the lid
I write the year and the kind
I make both jam and squash
I package and label
and everything goes in the freezer
Who am I?
Berry king
Berry-
Berit, Berit, Berit
Woo!
Tell it like it is
What what what
When he's working in the forest
I'm sitting comfortably
and if he's the berry king
then I'm the berry kingpin
I've got everybody with me
Heavy chains around my neck
The boy toils in the forest
Berit doesn't bear a berry.
Whatever I say goes
and that's all there is to say
You can join another junta
if you have a problem with that
The recruit is in the forest
and when the berries ripen
the general shouts "pick"
and leans back on the throne
Berry queen, berry queen, berry queen,
berry queen, berry queen, berry queen
Pick, pick, pick!
We're picking the berries
for pleasure and commerce
Filling up every cup
until the body breaks
We're picking with rakes
until the rakes clog up
The juicer is running hard
Berry king
Yeah!
Berry queen
Berry king
[applause]
[Hitton Litton]
Hitton litton, wanna go to talko
Hitton litton, pick some berries
Why is it that no one's here?
Hello?
Come out.
It's ten past talko,
and it's the best day of the year.
Picking day!
Hello?
Where are my berries?
Not you too,
poor little berry twig.
Oh my god, what have they done?
Who has emptied my forest?
The twig is completely bare,
not even the leaves are there
Someone has been through here
like a plow
What have I done
to deserve this?
Why should an old man feel this bad?
Those who pilfered my berries
will pay for this
even if its the last thing I do
They're going to regret this!
[laughter]
I've talked to Kurt about getting
some magazines from the outside.
I have a connection that could
get us weapons for the revolution.
If you order three magazines,
you get a knife set for free.
We'll subscribe for a year,
and get a shotgun.
Woo!
Now the forest is all out of berries!
Dad is going to be pissed,
this means war!
-Calm down.
-Ready? Jjjjjunta!
No more knitting, ladies,
the old man's going bye, hey!
Let's take a deep breath.
Don't run headfirst into the wall.
But good job on the berries.
We're starting to have everything we need,
and people are coming over to our side.
The next step will be
to create disorder in leadership.
How do we get Kurt, Klas, and Kenneth to fight?
The main freezer box!
We hit it.
We empty the berry reserve.
Then he'll be pissed-
-especially at Klas and Kenneth who...
-Margita, you had an idea?
-Can't you hear me out...
-No, that's far too dangerous.
We don't want to reveal ourselves yet.
Everything in good time.
You've just emptied the forest,
we have berries without end.
Let's write
a note that says-
"Klas, you're stupid.
Regards, Kenneth"
And then put that under the door.
-Oh my god.
-I think you've got something there.
Let's brainstorm some more,
but keep that as a fallback-
-and we'll see where it goes.
Seriously?
That's the worst idea I've ever heard.
Got something better?
There's nothing wrong with Gita's idea.
-Had it in my back pocket for a while.
-You can put it up your back pocket...
Junta!
Hey, girls!
They're the target, not us.
Let's take it from the top.
First we took the berries
into our custody
The villagers had their share
and got three buckets each
Now the people is with us
Believe in our cause
'cause many of them would surely
want to give Kurt a kick
Soon, we can take him because
people trust their gut
We'll put a spoke in their wheel
Throw a monkey wrench in
Sneak lightly on our toes
and keep under the radar
We'll put a spoke in their wheel
so the other spokes break
All people need is berries
And there it is
Weren't we lurking
with rolling pins?
Shush.
-Margita, how are you doing?
We have a walkie talkie,
so that we can hear
what Kurt and Klas and Kenneth's saying
and what they do
I listened all night long,
tried to stay awake
despite Kenneth reading stories
at Klas' bedtime
Oh, aren't they cute
It's like taking candy from a baby
We'll put a spoke in their wheel
Throw a monkey wrench in
We have them on the hook,
we have the walkie talkie
We'll put a spoke in their wheel
so the other spokes break
Whatever they do, we will know
And there it is
What is this?
I'm out.
Happy now?
"There it is."
Can't we hit the main freezer now?
Shush!
They're saying something.
Kenneth, have you seen my left boot?
Not again.
You've got to use the rubber band.
-Where are you?
-By Sjiudaladoback.
-Did you hear?
-He lost his boot.
No, about Sjuidaladoback.
I think I know what we have to do.
-We'll move the salt lick
-Why?
-So we can trip them
-I'm lost
We'll move it from A to B
and we'll have victory
-We'll move the salt lick
-Good idea
-So we can trip them
-I'm with you
And we know how it will end
because our plan is done
We'll put a spoke in their wheel
Throw a monkey wrench in
When they are out shooting
we will move the salt lick
We'll put a spoke in their wheel
so the other spokes break
-Eventually, they will quiver
-I'm off the wagon
Eventually, we'll get them
And there it is
[applause]
Hello, hello.
As you know, today was picking day-
-and where were you?
Oh, a stomach bug.
No, don't come closer!
Go inside, shut the door,
and keep it shut.
Hi, hi.
Is your hubby in the forest?
No, I was just wondering
if Perry is here or can help carry berries.
Oh, it's nothing to worry about-
-but for your own sake,
please tell me later where he was.
Hey hey!
Picking day came and went, and-
You're having pie?
Where did you get the berries?
Last year's?
They're long gone, I'll tell you-
We don't slam doors,
Book of the Homestead 25:8!
Klas and Kenneth, over.
Klas and Kenneth, over, it's code blue.
The sow is out, I repeat: the sow is out.
Klas and Kenneth, over. Hello? Hello?
Turn off that whining.
[Spanish guitar]
When we're grilling our wieners
I can't help but think
about how life would be
if I could join with you
Wiener?
You've always been in my sights
in the forest, rain or shine
but will I ever get to bag you
my beautiful young bull?
Oh, how it pains me
Without you, I am weak
for my life is the time
that I can spend with you
When we're on the hunt
[tango]
all that matters is you and I
if we need to warm up
we'll share a warm cup in the cabin
When we're on the hunt
and the drive is picking up
the feeling, how it burns
you have a hunting permit for my body
When we're on the hunt
my fire only burns for you
It heats up worse than death
and the wiener grilling bed in me
When we're on the hunt
it takes however long it takes
on weekends and on weekdays
my bullets are loaded and ready
And when you call for me over the radio
You seduce me, you destroy me
when you utter-
-Kenneth, come.
Ahh!
I want you with your gun
and only the hunting cap on
Take me to the back where you pack
I've marked up the hunting ground
I've polished my firing pin
Let's clean our guns on a forest hill
My life is not in vain
when you and I are on the hunt
[applause]
-Well, I guess we have to go.
-The rifles!
Let's go this way and check-
Oh no!
What did you do, you say?
How do you shoot a moose by mistake?
She came out behind a barn
when we were...
When you were what?
You think I don't see what's going on,
that I'm that dumb-
-but I know exactly
what you're doing in those hills!
You're grilling wieners all day long!
There is one holy moose cow,
and what do you do?
Pump her full of lead.
What's your plan now,
eating cous-cous and grasshoppers?
Congratulations, you're officially
Gambämark's worst moose hunters.
And that includes seven-foot-Albert
who's both blind and deaf!
-But somebody had moved the salt lick.
-Silence!
The villagers don't show up for talko,
the forest is barren-
-but somehow they're still having pie.
Josua is barely home,
and now Gunilla is dead.
You could't have picked a worse day.
I get such a headache.
That's what she said.
In this village, I do the "she said" jokes.
-Understood?!
-Yes, yes!
Stop whining.
Stand up straight.
Kenneth.
Did you say someone had moved the salt lick?
Yes, it was right in
the pass by Sjuidaladoback.
How could someone know you would be there?
Well, I have no idea.
I wasn't expecting you to.
But I have an idea.
Let's get them!
We are gathered here today
in honor of Gunilla.
We sacrificed her for the revolution-
-so I have written a little poem
that I would like to recite.
Your earthly life is now at an end,
and we happily remember all that happened.
For life gives and death takes
also from those who walk on hooves.
Your life was a party,
you were out every weekend.
You were out all the time,
because you were a moose.
You enjoyed walking through the autumn leaves
until you died from the hunter's bullet.
You walked proudly the path of life.
Gunilla, we will never forget you.
Your whirling dance
and playful hoof.
You'll be honored on Sunday
with a hearty roast.
[laughter]
She was lacking in brains-
-but there was plenty of meat!
It went just as we planned.
They must be panicking right now.
I have to say, good job.
I'm impressed!
Jjjjjunta!
-Let's strike when they're off balance!
-No, let's keep our heads cool.
This will play out by itself.
We can just watch the house of cards fall.
Gita,
come help me with the roast?
Are you starting dinner now?
Of course.
You can't revolt on an empty stomach.
-They're not taking it seriously-
[radio static]
Okay, boys.
Extra meeting at once.
But, Kurt.
We're guarding the main freezer box.
Should we leave it completely exposed?
Yes.
This more important, and will take all night.
Oh my god, did you hear?
Now's the time to strike!
-You really think so?
-Yes yes yes.
Let's take the main freezer box.
There will never be a better time.
If you don't come,
I'll go by myself.
Okay.
If you insist on going by yourself-
-then go.
Run, Josua.
Run like the wind!
-Margita, can you help with dinner?
-No, I'm tidying up.
And I'm on radio duty.
There's no point listening to that now.
We can't use anything we get.
We can't?
When we moved the salt lick,
we revealed that we can hear them.
We don't want that to be used against us.
Margita.
Where's the boy?
[spy music]
-Josua, it's a trap.
-What are you doing here?
-I see! It's you.
-It was all my idea.
Don't even try.
I see exactly how it is.
And what are you going to do about it?
It's two against one.
Oxen free!
Freeze!
Josua,
I will give you one more chance.
Join me,
and together, we can rule Gambämark-
-as father and son.
I'll never join you.
-Get them!
-Run, Josua!
[chase music]
-Josua got away.
-Take her to berry cleaning.
[accordion]
I have fought
for all these years
and this is
the thanks I get
for all my labor
suffering and hardship
a knife in the back
from everyone I hold dear
What doesn't kill you makes you stronger
although it stings and burns
so if they want to play rough
I will fight fire with fire
The people are all going to learn
They only live in my good graces
They will pick until their hands turn blue
and knit and knit until the needles break
They will work for me, harder than animals
and I will sell it across the wall
Berries and socks are in high demand
and the money goes to me
It's time for me to make a buck
like a cuckoo in the nest
Profit from what we've always had
Talko work
I will live in full comfort
while they work for me, the ass
Never again will I want for anything
Talko work
If people obey they won't be punished
Kurt knows what he wants
and he wants what's best for us
If you work hard, you get a cup of coffee
Kurt knows and understands
and we are fairly compensated
No whining, no snarling
It's on you if you were led astray
I was forced into this
and now it's finally time
It's time for me to make a buck
like a cuckoo in the nest
Profit from what we've always had
Talko work
I will live in full comfort
while they work for me, the ass
Never again will I want for anything
Talko work
Push harder like a man!
Have you never mowed a lawn before?!
Working together is a blessing.
I can see it ahead
my talko empire
The village works all week long
and the money goes into my pocket
Gold faucets and a new vest
Build a statue of me on a horse
and a palace where the community center was
made out of talko and blood
It's time for me to make a buck
like a cuckoo in the nest
Profit from what we've always had
Talko work
I will live in full comfort
while the work for me, the ass
Never again will I want for anything
Talko work!
[applause]
Dear diary.
[without music]
Everyone I get close to
are taken away with a whoosh
and the worst thing is
that it's because of me
Everything I touch
withers and dies
I though revenge would be sweet
but it just led to misery
Now the junta's gone
and Berit is being thrown out
and there is nothing that I can do
Happy birthday, Rafael.
[heavenly choir]
Josua!
Gunnar! Is that you?
Are you really here?
What do you think, drunkard?
Are you dead?
No, I showered.
-You have to tell me what to do.
-Remember what I taught you.
That it's more fun to drive drunk?
No, not that.
Don't judge the book by the cover,
even a slow hare changes its coat by winter.
I still don't understand what that means.
Exactly, that's right,
it has been said, and it will be!
Don't leave me!
Gunnar?
Ho-ho?
I know what I have to do.
???
Well, here you are, Berit.
You thought you could sabotage me
with your insidious plans.
The junta ladies are deep down
in the potato cellar-
-peeling until their hands blister.
And you will be excommunicated
faster than you can say huppalala!
The whole village will applaud
when we throw you out.
Who will applaud?
???
-The whole village will be there.
-The whole village?
How many showed up for picking talko?
Maybe it'll be the same people.
-Shut up.
-If you knew what your own son calls you.
-Weak-Kurt.
-Stop your doubtmongering.
You can't handle the truth?
You think you've got it all figured out,
but this time you're wrong.
Huppalala!
Hi.
Good day.
Were you going somewhere?
Yeah.
I'm supposed to guard the talko workers.
Kurt says someone has to,
what with the statue and palace being built.
???
That's right.
I was going to patrol the wall,
but maybe I'll make some stick bread first.
Alone.
I'll see you around.
I do think it's strange
that one man can decide who gets to hunt.
If one has found someone
that they enjoy hunting with-
-who are they to say
that it won't do?
-Kurt knows best.
-Does he?
He's been out of control
since the thing with the junta and Josua.
And we can't grill wieners or hunt anymore.
Maybe you don't always
have to be on the hunt!
Maybe it was just a phase.
So you didn't mean what you said?
That your life
is not in vain when we're on the hunt?
I just got a little fired up.
Se where that got us.
Gunilla is dead, all because we...
...grilled our wieners.
What's the point of being out hunting now?
To see the sun rising over the moors.
And the steam rising from the thermos.
And the smell
of that first cup of coffee
And achieving
those perfect wiener grilling embers.
Just being together.
You and I...
...on the hunt.
No, I have to go,
or Kurt will be mad.
Fine, go,
if you care more about Kurt and his insanity.
But if you ever want me
as your hunting partner again...
...you'll come here,
sit down, and make stick bread with me.
-Klas!
-What?
But I don't want any damn stick bread.
Let's show them what a bonfire is!
[march with organ and bells]
Out of the village you are thrown
Those who neglect the Book
are erased
Our village says shame,
you are thrown out, that's it.
By the power vested in me as elected official
I sentence you to excommunication.
???
Berit Backull!
You are sentenced for countless sins
and dirty deeds of your own will-
-rejecting our holy Book of the Homestead.
Book of the Homestead,
chapter one, verse nine.
"Today, dad was a real asshole."
What is this?
Is this what you're looking for?
-Josua, what are you doing?
-I have the Book-
-and it's my turn to read it to you.
Kurt Byman, my old man,
has broken the most important rules of the Book.
-Never!
-Listen-
"One should be happy, not pretentious."
Book of the Homestead 1:1.
"Work together and share fairly."
Book of the Homestead 1:2.
"Put the village before yourself."
Book of the Homstead 1:3.
-Stop it.
-I could go on all day-
-and you would be guilty on every charge.
Klas and Kenneth...
...seize him
and take him to berry cleaning.
[continuous dreamy tone]
You have only brought
misery to this village.
It's time to pay for what you've done,
for everyone you've excommunicated!
You're the worst shot I know.
When we played cards last week,
I let you win. Ha ha ha!
If you only knew
what I put in your pastries!
You got something there.
Ha ha ha!
-You're a bad leader!
-Ugly moustache!
And your jokes are crap!
-Say "my dixie wrecked"!
-My dick's -- no!
-You're weak.
-Weak-Kurt!
Weak-Kurt, Weak-Kurt, Weak-Kurt!
You're not my dad anymore.
[piano]
Everything on my conscience
seeps out in this berry hell
and I see
the bottom being revealed
as I sort through my shame
Saying sorry
feels far too weak
I was wrong
but I realized it too late
I was tough
and cold
My soul froze to ice
like the berries, in a way
I am a shadow of a man
Oh, berries can turn to sand
I was blind
The village suffered because of me
so I finally know what I am
I am an asshole
who ruins everything
An asshole who just wanted it
like it used to be
A full-on ass, oooh
and now I know I deserve a kick in...
...the ass
I wanted to build utopia
so I put up a wall
I thought I built my dream
but the dream became a cage
I just wanted to have a say
here in my fantasy
I thought I was the shit
but I was holier-than-thou
I am an asshole
who ruins everything
An asshole who just wanted it
like it used to be
A full-on ass, oooh
and now I know I deserve a kick in...
...the ass!
I know it now
Kurt Byman is an asshole
[applause]
Klas and Kenneth!
Seize him
and take him to berry cleaning.
Wait a minute.
If we punish him,
we're doing the same thing he did to us-
-and maintain the same toxic system,
continuing the endless cycle of oppression.
True!
I was just thinking that.
Josua.
Berit is right.
We can't go on like that.
I was born behind a wall.
[inspiring music]
A wall that was to protect us from the world.
It was to be the best place on earth.
But that's not what happened.
Because all shoes
don't fit all feet.
They may fit you,
but gives someone else blisters.
You can't tell people
how to live their lives.
You can't say force people to have a good time
because that's coercion-
-or a sing-along.
And god knows we have enough of that.
And we don't need more walls either.
We have enough of them...
...inside.
They are there because we are scared
of that which is strange, but-
-strange is good.
I have a dream that
those who want everyone to be normal-
-would let themselves
be a little strange.
There is hope,
because a wise man once told me-
-that even a slow hare changes coat by winter.
And dad,
you were right about one thing.
It was better like it used to be...
...before we started thinking
that it was better like it used to be.
So let's vote.
Who wants to tear down the wall for a bright...
[chainsaw]
[disco]
Shut up, let's dance!
Woo!
-Mäskis-Gunnar, you came back!
-Of course, I got so bored-
-and it's Rafael's birthday!
Ladies and gentlemen,
I've been out to see thw world-
-but I had to come back
and give you some more boogie woogie.
When had been thrown out
I went out for a drive
Now I have traveled
all around the world
I came to New York
and the west coast of Sweden
Rio de Janeiro
and Härmä Fitness Center
But Manhattan
was full of simpletons
and Alahärmi has nothing but Finns
I've been searching everywhere
for someone that is square
but everyone around the world
are village eccentrics
Shut up, let's dance
Mäskis-Gunnar's boogie woogie, wo-oh
I'm telling you
sha ha ha-
-shut up, let's dance
It's fine to be a little strange, wo-oh
We all share a globe
chock full of weirdos
Amen, hear him preach
Everyone is strange like Mäskis-Gunnar
Amen, that's a proper takeaway
In Gambämark, strange is now the new normal
Imagine standing here
watching a new day rise
I knew that we could do it,
this is the village I know
We may have been a bit lost
but we dared to feel
Now we're all one family
-Has anyone seen Kenneth?
Shut up, let's dance
Mäskis-Gunnar's boogie woogie, wo-oh
I'm telling you
sha ha ha-
-shut up, let's dance
It's fine to be a little strange, wo-oh
We all share a globe
chock full of weirdos
Woo, here it goes!
Wooeee!
And stop! Take your foot
Move your booty in a big boogie woogie
And hop! How does it feel
Let's take it from the top
I said stop! ???
Copacabana, let me do that conga
Hop! Give me more
Listen to me now
There's not a single person
who's middle of the road
That is all there is to it
Signed, Gunnar Mäsk
Hold on,
because it's time for a dance battle!
Stand in a semi-circle.
First, Klas versus Berit.
Go Klas, go Klas!
A paso doble with the hunting cap!
And Berit, you are up.
Be-be-be-be-be-Berit!
Go, go-go, go, Berit!
Next, Josua and Kurt.
Show him how it is, Josua.
Josua! Go Josua! Go Josua!
It's a breakdance with a twist-
-and from Kurt?
Wings followed by a backflip!
Wow, this is amazing
I think I understand
Hold on so I can write it
in the Book of the Homestead 2
Uhm, no...
Shut up, let's dance
Mäskis-Gunnar's boogie woogie, wo-oh
I'm telling you
sha ha ha-
-shut up, let's dance
It's fine to be a little strange, wo-oh
We all share a globe
chock full of weirdos
Shut up, let's dance
Mäskis-Gunnar's boogie woogie, wo-oh
I'm telling you
sha ha ha-
-shut up, let's dance
It's fine to be a little strange, wo-oh
We all share a globe
chock full of weirdos
[applause]
[music resumes]
Shut up, let's dance
Mäskis-Gunnar's boogie woogie, wo-oh
I'm telling you
sha ha ha-
-shut up, let's dance
It's fine to be a little strange, wo-oh
We all share a globe
chock full of weirdos
[applause]
Thank you!
Thank you so much!
Subtitles and translation: Snild Dolkow
https://github.com/dolkow/gambamark-subtitles